pronounce your name, Professor.
Okay.
And, you know, one of the things that Edward Kasanek told me at the New York Public Library is that during the Soviet period there was this attempt by the Soviet government to really have the appearance of one library, one kind of book culture.
Is that a fair statement that maybe with all these nationalities that we have
in Eastern Europe, but I know, for instance, that a lot of the Ukrainian books and manuscripts were taken out of the Ukraine and brought to Moscow or, say, Petersburg.
Does that make any sense at all?
Yeah, well, to the degree that the Soviet system and wherever it was implemented in East Central European countries was based on centralization of authority and centralization of
centralized control over and direction toward all aspects of life.
Within that context, production of anything, including books, was ostensibly directed by centralized state audiences.
and uh and at the same time libraries were also under the direction of centralized state organs or libraries or a live national library and so from that standpoint clearly there was a greater degree of control and even direction as to
what was published and for most of the Soviet period as well as for most of the communist period in East Central Europe this was a time that before the recent technological revolution which
now make it possible for anyone to be a publisher and and being in a in an older technological mode the only way primarily the way that books got published was through line of pipe machines and an old industry and these kinds of
instruments were carefully controlled by the state.
In those particular countries where the government was especially nervous about the spread of uncontrolled information, it could go so far that you would have to have them commit to have a typewriter.
Sure, Albania being the example of this, so... Oh, yes, definitely.
Oh, in Albania, yes.
So, I mean, that's the extreme that it could have gone.
But the point was that information in any form, and here we're talking about in the printed form,
was clearly the control of, under the control of the state.
As a result of that, one can talk about a unified book culture.
I guess what I'm driving at, was there, did the Soviet form, did they discourage the sense of a national memory?
You know, I mean,
as an example of... No, not only did they not... The Soviet system not only did not discourage a sense of a national memory, on the contrary, it probably put as much effort, but not only the Soviet... We'll talk about all the individual, I think, here.
Exactly.
They encouraged it, in your view?
Absolutely.
They not only...
When I'm talking about the Soviet system, we're talking about the Soviet Union, which was comprised of 17 republics, and then we're talking about those countries in East Central Europe that followed, to a greater or lesser degree, Soviet model.
And again, I will repeat, not only did they not discourage
a sense of a national memory, they encouraged, and probably encouraged as much as any society, one might argue even more so than any society, the recreation of a historical memory.
That is the difference.
The very basis for the existence of these systems
was the fact that they were embedded in a historical process.
The communist regimes, the worker states, based on Marxist ideology, were the ultimate achievement of historical evolution.
In their view.
Well, and as the ultimate achievement in historical evolution, it was incumbent upon them
to continually remind those citizens over whom they had control, many of whom they got control over them unwillingly, of this historical reality from their perspective.
And the way to justify that historical reality was to rewrite the historical records.
So this was not by any means a system that was trying to do away with historical memory, but it was a system that was trying to redefine historical memory.
That's the difference.
So every time it is true, they may have deliberately forgotten certain historical events, certain historical figures who may not have
easily fit into their framework that would allow for a justification of the present system, and calling such people reactionaries or events unimportant, or as Trotsky said, relegated to the dustbin of history.
So yes, in certain instances,
Who was Trotsky talking about when he talked about it?
He was talking about those forces that were not part of the... That's a very key core.
Yeah, sure.
His context is probably worthwhile to take another look at it.
Right, exactly.
He was referring to those figures and those events in history that seemingly not to have importance because they did not have an effect on the outcome
of a present communist regime.
But what I want to say, just to finish this point, every time an event or persons were removed from history, they then found new events, created new events, and blew them out of proportion, usually.
Every tiny little protest
that someone would write a letter was suddenly transformed into a major revolt.
We see this on historical maps.
If you look at historical maps that were produced for classrooms or for general consumption in the Soviet Union, you will always see these little red flags or these little red flames, dots all over maps, showing that in the 19th century, all over...
a territory.
There were workers' protests, for instance.
Those workers' protests, as I said, could range from a true strike to a true revolt to two or three people holding out the placard or writing a letter.
But this was rewriting history.
Those workers' revolts were much more important than some statement or book
by some intellectual that was concerned with building a nation-state that wasn't socialist in orientation, or that was related to the aristocracy, or something that was not fitting into the framework.
So by no means were they destroying it, on the contrary.
And we have books upon books, of course, and we have books upon books, and encyclopedias and guidebooks about biographies
of totally irrelevant, not totally irrelevant, because no one's totally irrelevant, but significantly unimportant figures, and they're in these biographical dictionaries simply because they were communists or left-wing sympathizers or whatever.
Can you think of any English-language books that might enlighten me on this?
Any studies that address what you're talking about right now?
It's in background.
Well, think about it.
I'll call you, but maybe you can come up with a couple of things that might help me.
I'm certainly interested in, I noticed, are those books about libraries that you have right here in the description of Ukraine, for instance?
Is that a book about the country?
One of the things Edward mentioned is that one of the things during the Soviet period that was not
and you mentioned Ukraine in particular, how central manuscripts and documents, very precious items, were brought to the center.
And in fact, a lot of these places are seeking repatriation, at least.
Is this something that you know about, or do you agree with Edward on that?
Yeah, well, yes.
Was there a centralization of the memory into when
Yes, there was.
It would have been part of that process of redefining that you thought.
Yeah, there was.
I think, you know, we're talking about much of what I just said when you ask about books on the subject, I can't think of any immediately offhand because much of what I just said at one level was common knowledge.
The history
was an instrument of the state.
History and the teaching of history was of extreme importance because it allowed for if done according to guidelines of the party it justified the existence
of the present regimes.
Now, in a sense, what the Soviets were doing, wherever they were, was not really any different than any other state that has to justify its existence.
We also know the quip that history is written by the winners.
So when a war ends, the way the war is interpreted, the received knowledge, is basically that of the victor.
Just look at Shakespeare's historical place, and you can tell.
So, I mean, this is not something that is unique to Soviet society.
It is present in every society, including so-called democratic societies,
as those in North America or Western Europe, just as much as anyone do they do this.
Usually, in our systems, it takes the following form.
It's a bit more complex and a bit more diffuse, but it does take the following form in the school system.
School systems are always the most crucial aspects of any society because it's through the school system that one pervades
the common historical memory.
It's not through scholarly monographs.
It's how that information gets watered down.
And I think what's very important to note that in particular, in particular with regard to history, though this occurred perhaps in other disciplines as well, but in particular with regard to history in former Soviet Union and East Central Europe,
no books on history, especially those that were for mass consumption, whether large popular works or school textbooks in particular, was ever allowed to be published unless it went through numerous committees in which all questions of whether the proper ideological emphasis was being
drawn or stated.
And then after the experts finished, then it had to go through to the ideological center.
I mean, every one of these systems had people who read it and made sure that it coincided with the party directors.
whether those party directors were within Moscow or within each of the republics.
Only difference is that if you were in a republic, the Ukrainian Republic or the Estonian Republic, its own experts would approve a text, then it would go to the ideological expert in the particular republic, but then that one always, always had to think, well, what will Moscow?
Am I violating...
what Moscow would think.
So it was just another step.
But it was basically the same kind of situation.
And once again, this is not unique to the Soviet system.
Probably the closest analogy to the Soviet system is the Roman Catholic Church.
There is not one book that is used within the Roman Catholic Church ever that does not have a printed imprimatur from a bishop.
Now, what does that mean?
That means that it had to be approved by that bishop and or his ideological expert before it is allowed to be disseminated amongst the faithful.
Because, God forbid, if there is something... This continues to be the case?
Absolutely.
They did give you the index, right?
No, they didn't.
There's still things on the index.
That is just a specific... And God forbid... Yeah, God forbid that there would be something in those books that were not in accord with accepted Catholic practice.
Then you would be committing heresy.
In that case... As an individual, as a lay person, or are you talking about people within the church?
a person, if there would be something in a book, in a book produced by, this is very analogous to the Soviet system, if there would be something in a book of catechism, catechism is the basic rules or guides to belief.
So, if that book did not go through proper control
and receive the informator from a bishop who is responsible for a given area and is responsible for protecting the souls of his flock.
So if there is something in that book that, who knows?
Someone sneaks in and says, well, it's possible to, you know, it's possible under certain conditions to have an abortion.
That's right.
Well, I mean, this is against the teachings of the Catholic Church.
It's against taking the life of an individual.
A priest probably should be allowed to have a life.
Whatever.
All such things could get snuck into text one way or another.
Well, and if that got snuck into a text, and if then it gets printed, and then the faithful read it, they are now committing heresy in the eyes of the Church,
They are sinners, they cannot be saved, or they, or whatever, and this now is being promoted by someone within the church, you see?
So by the same token, if you were in the Soviet Union... I have to see if that's still really... Paul LeClaire, who's the president of the New York Public Library, told me an interesting story.
He went to Holy Cross College in Washington, which is a Jesuit school.
And we're talking the 60s, he's about my age.
He actually had to...
write the bishop for permission to read Rousseau, Voltaire, Revelé.
And they wrote back and they gave permission.
But he actually, so he wouldn't be committed.
And the Jesuit teacher also had to write for permission to be able to discuss these books in his class.
There is still an index, to the best of my knowledge, but I'm talking about two different things here.
I mean, there are two different things.
One is the need, and this is absolute,
are in present publications within the Roman Catholic Church to have an imprimatur of a bishop.
The other thing is, is books that already exist, whether published by the Church or not published by the Church, that are somehow potentially dangerous to the faithful.
So we're talking about books and books through history.
Yeah, these are two different things.
The index is basically a review and
an identification of dangerous things, no matter what those things are.
The other stuff is simply new stuff that is being produced by and in which the organization is concerned with its ideological purity.
And from that standpoint, direct analogy with Soviet system.
Soviet system, whether it was in the Soviet Union or whether it was a
similar system in Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, or anywhere.
All of these, and so therefore, in that context related to your question of collection of documents or other things and centralizing them, it's all related.
Because in order to produce a common ideological script, you have to have control of the data.
Not anyone should be allowed to
have access to documents that somehow might be in violation of what the party has decided, what the government has decided, to be the acceptable body of knowledge that people should have.
Right.
Of course, during the Soviet period, books and libraries were there to serve as an instrument of the state.
Correct.
And so, what I'm interested in now is the dramatic, dramatic change that this has happened.
Of course, they're not getting the funds, but they're actually having to come around and raise money, and they're becoming libraries like, you know, you and I know, this library across the street.
Do you agree with this?
Yeah, well, I think the dramatic change that is taking place is basically the following.
Every regime...
Every ruling power, in some way, tries to manipulate knowledge.
And depending on the period of time, it's really only in the 20th century, where you approach the possibility through mass communication.
to control the way people think.
Probably as controlled as anybody are the masses of population in the United States and in Canada whose knowledge of the world is based on snippets that come over television, on the news,
either the evening news, so-called international news, which is not international, network news, or on your late news program.
I mean, what we know about the world is what is packaged for us in entertainment shows called news programs.
So what I'm describing here is not a function simply of what we would call
classic totalitarian societies.
But that is possible only really, that was only possible in the 20th century.
But even, even in those societies that have tried to control and manipulate knowledge amongst the vast majority of its citizens, and have gone out and tried to erase
certain aspects of the historical memory in their in their recreation process not in their erasing but in their recreation to erase certain aspects of it even to the degree of destroying cemeteries or you know disinterning bodies this has happened as well because you wanted to get rid of memory even in the 20th century no system has been able to succeed in this activity
historical memory, after all, rests in the minds of individuals, and it is passed on not only through books, but through oral tradition, just as it had been passed on through oral tradition in the time of the Homer, the Iliad, and the Odyssey, etc.
Right?
In many ways, aspects of modern 20th century societies return to...
to prehistorical days in which information and historical memory of events of individuals was passed on verbally.
So there was always an awareness that somewhere out there there was information that we were not getting through our official channels, if you will.
And certainly if someone became a little bit more intellectually inclined, immediately they would know that what they read was not the full story.
And so now when those ideological controls have been removed as a result of the fall of the Soviet Union and fall of communism in East Central Europe, there has been a flood of people who are desperate for...
trying to get concrete knowledge about those events and individuals who they had a vague memory of.
And how are they satisfying this?
They're satisfying it?
The first way they have done it, the very immediate way that it was done, concretely, was to reprint, and now technology makes it possible,
All the old books.
Where were all the old books?
The old books, and that's another thing.
The Soviet system, in general, no, there was exceptions.
The Soviet system never destroyed things.
They kept everything.
They may have kept it under lock and key.
Every library had what is known as a special collection.
I can spell that.
S-P-E-T-S-F-O-N-D.
S-P-E-T-
that the only people who could read them who were those who had special permission or who were writing ideological or historical tracts against them, right?
But they were closed, it was restricted.
So, the stuff was never thrown away.
Do you have first-hand knowledge of this?
Oh, sure, this is common knowledge.
Everyone knows this.
I mean, in this part of the world, it's this.
I believe everyone knows it was a normal thing.
And besides, I know historians who actually worked in Spets Fundy.
And those Westerners, when we came there during the detente period in the 60s and 70s, when these exchange programs existed, as the only
We were allowed to use material, because we knew about the existence of material, and we would ask for publications, usually not archival material, but publications that were not available for the general public, but we could get them because we weren't the general public.
And they came from these special funds, special collections.
This is normal.
And by the way, by the way, by the way, you know, we have spets funds in this library.
Oh, sure.
And on also every library, certainly in the 40s and 50s, I mean, it's not like the Catholic Church.
We were beyond the Catholic Church in terms of being able to read Rousseau, but we certainly couldn't read Lady Chatterley's Lover for a long time, and I would imagine that the story of O is probably still locked up somewhere as well because of sadomasochism.
You think so?
Oh, it's without question.
Well, I can tell you, when I was an undergraduate at Rutgers and at Princeton, there was special collections.
Well, I mean, everybody has special collections.
That's how you define the word special, I guess.
Here was limiting access to people because of the content of the book, not because of its rarity that you didn't want people destroying it.
Definition of words special takes out a new context, doesn't it?
Absolutely.
And so the first thing in terms of this explosion of access to former knowledge was to... What did you call it?
Former knowledge?
Yeah, well, yeah, what I meant was to... That's interesting.
Like I went into...
Hibernation.
To reprint books that haven't been available for a long time.
And if you walk the streets of the former Soviet Union today, you can still see in many of the kiosks that sell books on the street, reprints of things from before World War I. Like very recent reprints.
Absolutely.
In the last two or three years, yes.
And again, you have to remember, if you travel there, some of the most popular books are books of history and of literature, because a lot of literary works and writers were banned as well.
How about Western stuff?
I understand that they have a pretty good, strong interest.
Oh, well, they've always had an interest in cultures from other parts of the world, but for the longest time, only certain authors were permitted.
Those authors that were, you know, left-wing sympathizers, or those that described the underside of American or capitalist life, so third-rate writers like Erskine Caldwell and...
Some of these others were really big sellers in the Soviet Union, but the readers knew that there was other kind of literature as well.
Tell me a little bit what Ukrainian Studies is, which was the department you're sharing here.
Ukrainian Studies is... Excuse me, one second.
I thought I'd...
various disciplines that are concerned with the study of the territory of Ukraine and Ukrainian culture.
So Ukrainian studies can include Ukrainian history, Ukrainian literature, Ukrainian language.
It's straightforward.
In this particular case, I hold a professorship of Ukrainian, literally called Ukrainian studies, though in effect it's Ukrainian history.
I teach Ukrainian history, just like one would have German studies, Germanic studies, or Italian studies, or whatever.
Is the Ukraine a political, what are the boundaries of Ukraine in the context of how you teach it?
Could you give me a
a sense of what you cover in terms of scope?
Physically, geographically.
Yeah, okay.
Well, I'm surprised by the question.
No, I... It doesn't reflect ignorance, by the way.
No, no.
It's just, you know, is it strictly the Ukraine?
I know the Ukraine.
Then that's the... Yes.
Okay.
Very simple.
I mean, you mentioned something earlier about Albanians, so you don't really sneak off into Albania for... Well, me as an individual and me as a scholar, I mean, I don't just simply write about Ukraine.
I happen to write about other things in the world, including the Monegosk or Malta or Luxembourg.
I've published in all of these areas.
That's because of my particular interest.
Sure.
And one of the things that I have done, a major work that I have done, is a historical atlas of East Central Europe, which has specific chapters on book culture, by the way.
And so I'll just show you what we've probably done.
I can have this?
Can I have this brochure?
Yeah, you can take that.
It's quite reasonable.
It's exactly the same thing.
It's just the paper's the same.
So here, for instance, is on education and printing.
Mm-hmm.
So you can see the evolution of printing and the discussion of book culture in this part of the world.
That's an essential thing.
Yeah, this is what you want to begin with.
Okay, great.
And this is... And this is... I can give you... That's great.
You have to... Forgive me, this was put together...
You know, usually I'm much better prepared for that.
Edward just proposed this about three days ago.
I called you the day this came together.
He said, you're going to be in Toronto.
I must talk to you.
And I'm glad he suggested it.
I understand you're something of a bibliophile as well.
I mean, do you, in terms of books?
Well, yeah, I, yes, I am,
And in fact, I have a piece which you probably will find of interest.
Let me see if I have a copy of it.
I have done a lot of bibliographies and descriptions of libraries, specifically as they are related to my area of specialty, which is either Ukraine or a...
a small people in East Central Europe, and there I have done catalogs of books.
I'm in the process of producing a kind of mini national bibliography, which, so it's in that sense, so I'll show you with some of that.
And you said that you have a copy of an essay that you wrote?
Yes, I'm going to skip that, because that I...
of this kind of national bibliography.
The second volume is now in its latter stages.
This is an example of a catalog of all Ukrainian-related materials, two volumes, 2,000 pages.
These are all yours.
Yeah, well, I'm working together.
Oh, you get it?
Yeah.
Oh, well, then it was published—I thought I had a— If you have it, if you have an off-print, that would be great.
Well, that's what I was looking for, and I don't have an off-print, but as minimally I can give you the— You can just cite it for me, I guess.
The point, or the— Because I thought I had the whole thing here, but I don't know.
You know, it's incredible.
Is it within the last five years?
Yeah, I just had to... I don't have... Can you believe it?
I don't have a goddamn... Oh, wait a minute.
Theography.
What I published.
Terrible.
This was in the 70s.
And this is a good piece, actually.
No, I'll get it.
I'll get it.
Yeah, that's what I'm looking for.
Here it is.
Lo and behold, it would be on a... It was even reprinted in the Harvard series.
Look at that.
It's called Nationalism and National Bibliography, and it does a comparative analysis of varying bibliographical works through every country in Europe.
Yeah, that's important.
It's contextual.
And I'll... I'll feel after that.
Terrific.
You point out here, and I was just reading this Journal of Ukrainian Studies, looking at it, and you talk about the importance, of course, of materials, of research materials.
And we were talking, you know, the other interviews I was doing here.
If you're going to be recognized as a great university, I mean, one way to really measure this is by the numbers of books that you have, isn't it?
It's almost like putting your chips on the table, I guess.
If you want to be regarded as the best and the greatest in Canada, you have to have 10 million books.
Is that a preposterous statement, or do you agree with that just on its face?
Totally agree.
And would you say that the...
Do they have, obviously you've done a bibliography of materials here.
Are the materials strong here?
Yeah, I went to the point that they attract serious scholars and generate scholarship.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I would say that this is one of the ten top libraries in North America.
It's the only one in Canada, but it's one of the, I would say, one of the ten best in North America.
It is relatively strong in East Central Europe and the former Soviet Union.
And how does that happen?
I mean, does the faculty say we have to get certain materials?
Do they give you a budget for this?
Are they supportive in your... Yeah, I'm dancing around a subject.
Yeah, sure.
How does it happen?
Very often...
are great collections and there are books about Widener Library which kind of which kind of underlie what I'm about to say very often great collections grow somewhat serendipitously let me give you an example a a former
A colleague of mine at Harvard, Carl Deutsch, who's a specialist in the history of nationalism, well known.
He used to tell this story when he was writing his book on nationalism.
Before that, he did an article for World Politics, I believe,
varying peoples of Europe, and in connection with that, traveled to varying places, and wound up in the town called Hur, C-H-U-R, in eastern Switzerland, which is the cultural capital of the Romant, or the Retoromant, which is a small minority of people, because they are official people,
Switzerland doesn't have three peoples, it has four.
One of these is the Reto-Roman, there's about 50,000 of them in the far eastern part of the country, and Khur is their cultural center.
And so, while he was there, he was visiting various libraries, and one man was very proud and brought him to this library in Khur, where he pointed out and said that this is the
you're standing in one of the richest collections of retro-romanche books you're going to find anywhere.
But it's not the richest.
The richest collection is at Widener Library in Cambridge.
And that's because somebody in the 20s or 30s
no, excuse me, in this case, no, no, it was before World War I, was interested in this area and simply collected it all, right?
And then it was a professor's university and then gave it to them.
Which happens often.
So from that standpoint... But this professor had a collection that exceeded the one that was... Yes, exactly, exactly, exactly.
And that happens.
And it occurs...
And so a lot of these great collections evolve because there are individual professors at the university who become interested in a specific area and then when they die or during their lives they donate their collections to the library.
Mixed with that are
the university, for whatever reason, decides to specialize in some parts of the world, and therefore you bring in new professors who are specialists who then enrich that collection either by giving their own stuff or by requesting the library to purchase stuff because they're teaching in that area, which libraries usually do.
If one
It's very rare that a professor will ask the library to get something, and the library will not.
It almost always does.
So, in that sense, certain parts of the world may have very rich collections that... And the University of Toronto is not bad in East Central Europe.
And again, why?
Because of the specific nature of
of Canada is that the federal government about 20, 30 years ago started allotting money, matching money with community organizations that were interested in endowing university chairs that are in their cultures.
So the University of Toronto is actually unique in North America.
It's the only place where there are endowed chairs in
as an example, Hungarian, Estonian, and Finnish.
Now, this is the Finno-Ugric group.
It's rare.
It's the only place in North America where you can study all three of these languages, Finno-Ugric languages.
with people who are full-time specialists.
And the materials are here.
And so therefore, exactly.
So now suddenly, you know, we've got Estonian stuff.
I mean, where the hell are you going to find Estonian stuff in North America?
Well, you will find it here because we happen to have an Estonian chair.
And then besides that, we have a chair of Ukrainian studies.
We already have a Ukrainian program.
But the university is willing to buy the stuff.
Yes, exactly.
You don't find this at all places.
And then, again, the university is willing to buy it.
In this particular case, the chairs, when they were established, had a certain budget also that helped buy some material.
Then you have individual donors who will endow collections.
Just last week, this library...
received a large endowment by some check to permanently endow the purchase of books dealing with checks and slow books.
That's how these things happen.
Edward mentioned something about emigre libraries that were set up.
Yes.
Are you familiar with that?
And what was the genesis of that?
Okay, the genesis of that was the following.
You remember when I was talking about the
a Soviet system and it's wanting to not destroy historical memory but refashion it but yet it even a totalitarian society was unable to control historical memory because it's embedded in individuals or physical either in their minds or their physical presence because a lot of these people fled their homelands
and some of them brought books with them right uh or produced new literature wherever they lived not being under the control of a totalitarian state and perhaps even enter into some kind of
surreptitious or stealthy way of getting more material.
Oh, absolutely.
Of getting a pipeline.
Absolutely.
And how do you think some of the great literature of the 20th century from the Soviet Union, including Dr. Zhivago, I mean, being the outstanding one, but there's a whole host of them.
Of course.
So many of these peoples, in particular those that were under regimes that they perceived as denying them of freedom,
established a whole host of cultural organizations to retain their historical cultural heritage in whatever land they lived.
And certain communities, peoples that were stateless for a long time, built enormously important cultural institutions abroad.
So, for instance, you know Poland existed in the 20th century, but it didn't exist in the 19th century.
Poland was just an idea amongst some intellectuals, many of whom fled to Paris, and the most important library of Polish materials in the 19th century is not anywhere in Poland or anywhere in those countries that had controlled Poland, but in Paris.
and some of the most important journals and publications.
What's the name of it?
That was called the Polish National Library.
And it was in Paris?
Yeah, of course.
Is it still there?
I don't know if the Polish one still is there.
They certainly have publishing houses, Polish.
I mean, this is a common phenomenon.
So the Polish National Library, and it was in Paris.
Exactly.
And this was... Well, there is a Polish National Library in Poland, too.
But this, of course, existed in Paris in the 19th century, the greatest Polish writer of the 19th century, Adam Nitzkewicz.
That's where he lived.
But why?
Why did they go... Well, in this particular case, because he was a Pole, and Poland was just occupied and destroyed in the late 18th century, and the Poles
revolted twice against the Russian Empire in 1830 and 1863.
That's a great historical story.
Those revolts were put down, were put down, you know, with force, and as a result of that, many intellectuals and other people were forced to emigrate abroad.
Is there a good book on this that you can recommend?
Um...
I guess I would begin by looking at the equivalent of my history of Ukraine, history of Poland.
Well, there's a whole section on there.
It's called Norman Davies.
Okay.
But what is this period called in Polish history?
Oh, this is the 19th century.
It's the 19th century.
It doesn't have a name.
It's not like the 30th century.
Yeah, it's the period of time when Poland didn't exist.
Poland didn't exist from 1795 until 1918.
There was no country of Poland.
What was it called?
What was it?
What was that area?
It was divided between the three empires, Russia, Austria, and Prussia.
It's known as the three partitions.
That's a great story.
The three partitions of Poland.
Well, Poland became... Don't you understand that we Americans are really ignorant of the East and European history?
Terribly.
Yeah, well, that's true.
However, in the case of Poland, it's somewhat a bit different.
What I just described to you was written down in great detail by Voltaire already in the 18th century.
So, I mean, this is not something that is beyond the pale of even Western knowledge.
I'm not saying it's beyond the pale, but I think that we're kind of myopic about...
Well, but again, also I would be somewhat surprised that even if any place in America, and certainly in American cities like New York, New York City is just filled and overflowing with Ukrainian, Polish, Lithuanian, Sikh, Kurd, name it, cultural centers, museums, libraries.
evil the great center of yiddish culture is in new york city it is not in vilnius anymore where it was founded i mean it's you know america is just teaming with this stuff teaming why do you suppose that is why why new york city why well
That sounds like a stupid question, but why not to London?
I would say that I'm surprised that as an American, you're asking the question.
No, but I want to hear your response.
Okay.
All right.
Where do you live?
Massachusetts.
How was Massachusetts founded?
How was it founded?
Well, what's the West American mythology?
The mythology is that the other pilgrims came.
Yeah, stepped off on this rock.
It's 1620.
Right.
Well, who were the pilgrims?
Well, they were Brits.
And what did they do?
Why were they here?
To escape.
What?
Persecution.
For religious purposes.
And what did they do when they came here?
They set up institutions eventually to preserve their common historical heritage, which was different from the land that they fled from.
There is hardly...
America is that.
In one sense, America is that and nothing else.
So to ask the question, why did these people come to America and not somewhere else?
Or why did they do what they did?
Why did they do what they did?
It's because almost that's what all America is about.
And why certain centers and not others?
Well, obviously cities.
have always drawn, you know, and have been places of concentration.
New York City happens to be this international emporium that has always drawn people from various parts of the world, and as we know just in terms of immigration pattern, that is where, it was the largest city in the United States, and also the place of entry for the longest period of time.
But you have the same... Sure, you have the same thing on the West Coast in California.
For the Asian... Exactly, exactly.
And also, interestingly, for the Russians, because some Russians came from Siberia and from that part.
I know these questions might sound naive and stupid, but they are... How did you get some quotation in front of me?
No, no, you're provoking me well.
And you're getting them, aren't you?
I'm pleased that
You know, take a look at my book.
My book speaks for itself.
When I write, it does come out pretty... I have to run.
I'm going to catch an airplane.
Is there anything else I want to do?
Can I call you at some point?
What I'd like to do is go back and transcribe the tape.
Sure.
Find some of these things.
Look at them.
And then, as they say, now we begin.
The Multicultural History Society of Ontario.
That's actually an institution.
And it was established about 20 years ago, and its function is to collect archival material, publications, oral history, and publish books about the different peoples who live in Canada.
All the peoples who live in Canada.
And our major project at the moment is an encyclopedia of Canada's peoples, of which I'm the editor-in-chief.
Maybe that can be the discussion of a telephone conversation.
Fine.
If you don't mind.
When's the best time?
Yeah, that's right.
I was just going to say, right on the back of the card, on this card, Monday through Wednesdays.
And at the chair.
Meeting here?
Yeah, Thursday and Friday, like today.
Thursday and Friday at the chair.
Okay.
Monday and Wednesday, multicultural.
How about time?
Preferably the mornings.
Okay.
I'll give you a call.
That's because you must have some...